SELECTIONS FROM THE WRITINGS OF SENECA, TO WHICH PASSAGES MORE OR LESS
                 CLOSELY AKIN OCCUR IN THE SCRIPTURES.


                     FROM THE LETTERS TO LUCILIUS.


A holy spirit dwells within us, the observer and keeper of the evil and
the good; it treats us just as it is treated by us.

If you do what is right, let all men know it; if what is wrong, does it
matter that no one knows it, since you know it yourself? O what a
wretched man you are if you disregard such a witness!

The human mind has come down from the spirit that dwells on high.

Fortune exempts many from punishment; from fear, no one.

It is natural for those who have done wrong to be afraid.

The light is irksome to a bad conscience.

The guilty have sometimes the good fortune not to be found out; never
the certainty of it.

Good precepts, if you often reflect upon them, will profit you equally
with good examples.

If thou wouldst gain the favor of the gods, be good.

He adequately worships the gods who imitates them.

It suffices God that he be worshiped and loved; love cannot be mixed
with fear.

What thou hast learned, confirm by doing.

A great and holy spirit, it is true, holds converse with us, but it
cleaves to its origin.

Let the young reverence and look up to their teachers.

How wisely you live is an important matter: not, how long.

It is not a good thing to live; it is, to live wisely.

He who would live for himself must live for others.

He who has much covets more.

No one is worthy of God save him who contemns riches.

Dare to contemn riches and thus to make thyself worthy of God.

The shortest road to riches is to contemn riches.

Not he who has little but he who covets more is poor.

Thin is the texture of a lie; it is easily seen through if closely
examined.

The praise is not in the deed but in the way it is done.

To be master of one’s self is the greatest mastery.

One cause of the evils of our time is that we live after the example of
others. We are not guided by reason but led astray by custom.

Money never made anybody rich.

Why did God create the world? He is good; a good being feels no aversion
to anything that is good. Therefore He made the world as good as
possible. _Quoted from Plato._

Some of our time is filched from us, some is stolen outright, some
passes unnoticed. But most reprehensible of all things is to lose it by
mere negligence; and if you will note carefully, men spend a great part
of life in doing evil, the greatest part in doing nothing the whole of
it doing something else than they ought. Whom will you name that places
any value on time? Who prizes a day? Who realizes that he is dying
daily? For we err when we regard death as something in the future; a
great part of it has already passed; the portion of our life that is
behind us, death holds. Do, therefore, Lucilius, what you write that you
are doing, husband every hour; you will be less dependent upon to-morrow
if you seize to-day. Everything else belongs to others, time only is
ours.

There is a great difference between not wanting to sin and not knowing
how.

If thou wouldst get rid of thy vices keep out of bad company.

He worships God who knows Him.

No one commits wrongs for himself alone; he communicates them to others
and is in turn led astray by others.

Our minds are dazzled when they look upon truth.

No virtue remains hidden, and it suffers no damage by having been
hidden.

Nature has given to all the fundamental principles and seeds of virtue.

Nature does not make us virtuous; it is an art to become good.

If what you are doing is right, all men may know it.

The reward of all the virtues is in the virtues themselves. The
recompense of a good deed is to have done it.

Virtue alone brings lasting and sure happiness.

He errs who thinks the gods intentionally inflict injuries on any one;
they cannot do so; they can neither receive nor do injury.

So live with men as if God saw thee; so talk with God as if men heard
thee.

God has no need of ministering servants: He Himself ministers to men; is
present everywhere and in everything.

The gods extend a helping hand to those who would rise. Do you wonder
that man goes to the gods? God comes to men, and what is more, He comes
into men. No mind is good without God.

All men, if they are traced to their first origin, are from the gods.

Every day, every hour, reminds us of our nothingness and, by some fresh
admonition, warns those of their frailty who are prone to forget it.

Give heed to each day as if it were your whole life. Nothing will so
much enable you to exercise control over yourself in all things as to
think often of the uncertainty and brevity of life.

You will grant that the greatest piety toward the gods is a
characteristic of a good man; and so whatever may befall him he will
bear with equanimity, for he will know that it has happened in harmony
with that divine law by which all things are governed.

No one is strong enough to rise by his own strength; every man needs
some one to extend a hand, some one to lead him.

So let us live, so let us talk, that our destiny may find us prepared
and ready to follow it. Great is the soul that has yielded itself to
God; on the other hand, that one is cowardly and degenerate that
resists, that finds fault with the order of the world, and is more ready
to set the the gods right than itself.

We ought to have before our minds some one whom we revere; some one
whose influence makes even our most secret thoughts holier.

Long is a way by precepts; short and effectual, by examples.

Weaker minds, however, have need of some one to go before who shall say,
“This avoid, this do.”

The community of which we form a part is very much like an arch built of
stone; it would at once fall down if one did not support another.

We are members of an immense body. Nature begat us as kinsmen, since it
formed us of the same elements and for the same end.

What is it that draws us in one direction when we would go in another,
that urges us on when we want to resist, that strives against our
desires and does not permit us to do what we purpose?

If thou wishest to be loved, love!

No one is free that is the slave of his body.

We ought to live in this thought: I was not born for a corner only; my
country is this entire world.

The beginning of salvation is the knowledge of sin. _Quoted from
Epicurus._

Philosophy sheds its light upon all men.

It is so difficult for us to get well because we do not know that we are
sick.

It is the strongest evidence that our mind is directed toward its own
improvement when we see faults that we had not before observed.

It is an infirmity of mind not to be able to bear riches.

To live right is in the power of everybody.

The acknowledgement of a fault is the beginning of a better life.

He who does not admit his proneness to do wrong has no desire to be
corrected. You must recognize your errors before you can correct them.

The ancients held the first requisite of repentance to be an examination
of one’s self, especially since without this, life would not be worth
living.

There is no vice without some excuse.

You ask me what you should particularly avoid. (I answer,) a crowd. You
cannot with safety to yourself mingle in a large company. I must verily
confess my own weakness. I never bring back the same character that I
took with me; something which I had banished, returns; something else
that I had quieted, is aroused.... But nothing is so damaging to a good
character as to spend much time at public spectacles, for with the
pleasure we receive vices the more easily creep in unawares.

It is a large part of goodness to desire to become good.

There is a certain fitness in the feeling of sorrow; this the sage ought
to heed, and just as in everything else so in grief there is a proper
mean.

What fate did not give it did not take away.

To obey God is liberty.

No one is out of the reach of the temptation of vice unless he has
banished it wholly from his breast; and no one has banished it wholly
until he has put wisdom in its stead.

Great is the praise if man is helpful to man. We admonish you to extend
a hand to the shipwrecked; to point out the way to the lost; to share
your bread with the hungry.

No one ever renders a service to another without also rendering a
service to himself.

Often what is given is a small matter; what follows from it, a great
one.

When we reason upon the immortality of the soul, we do not regard as of
little weight the universal belief of men who either fear or revere the
gods of the lower world.

That day which thou dreadest as if it were thy last is the day of the
birth into eternity.

A time will come that shall unite us and bring us into each other’s
company.

Then shall our soul have reason to rejoice because, freed from this
darkness in which it is involved, it shall see the light, no longer with
feeble vision, but in all the brightness of day, and it will have
returned to its own heaven since it will again occupy the place which
belongs to it by right of birth. Its origin calls it on high.

Let another begin a quarrel, but let reconciliation begin with thee.

What else is nature than God and the divine reason that permeates the
whole world and all its parts. Whithersoever thou turnest thou wilt see
Him before thee; there is no place where He is not; He Himself fills all
His work.

Every crime is committed before the deed is done.

The human mind has come down from the spirit that dwells on high.

Believe me, the creator of this vast universe, whoever he may have been,
whether it was a god, master of everything, whether it was an
incorporeal intelligence able to bring forth the most brilliant marvels,
whether it was a divine spirit diffused with equal energy in the
smallest and the largest things, whether it was destiny and an immutable
concatenation of causes linked together: this sovereign potentate did
not wish to leave us dependent upon any one else even in the smallest
matters.

Stars shall impinge upon stars and all matter that now delights us with
its beautiful order will burn in one huge conflagration.

How often he who refuses pardon to others begs it for himself!

It is base to say one thing and mean another; it is baser to write one
thing and mean another.

A wise man will pardon an injury, though it be great, and if he can do
it without breach of piety and fidelity, that is, if the whole injury
pertains to himself.

As far as thou canst, accuse thyself, try thyself, discharge the office,
first of a prosecutor, then of a judge, lastly of an intercessor.

We can never quarrel enough with our vices, which, I beseech thee,
persecute perpetually. Cast from thee everything that corrupts the
heart; and if thou canst not otherwise get rid of it, spare not the
heart itself.


                          FROM DE BENEFICIIS.


Nature is not without God nor is God without nature. Both are the same
and their functions are the same. So, too, nature, destiny, fortune, are
all the names of the same God.

It is the mark of a noble and generous soul to be helpful, to do good;
he who confers favors, imitates the gods.

Beneficence always makes haste; what one does willingly one does
quickly.

We owe no thanks for a favor that has for a long time adhered to the
hands of the giver, as it were; which he seems to have let go with
reluctance and which one might almost say had been wrested from him.

Those favors are most gratifying to us that are deliberately and
willingly offered, and in connection with which the only hesitancy is on
the part of the recipient.

I do not make the favors I confer a matter of public record.

He who intends to be grateful ought to think about requiting a favor as
soon as he receives it.

This is the law of beneficence between two persons: the one should
forthwith forget that he has given; the other should never forget that
he has received.

You buy from the physician a thing that is above price, life and health;
from the teacher of belles-lettres, acquaintance with the liberal arts.
Yet it is not the value of these things that you pay for but their
pains, because when they are serving us they give up their private
business to devote themselves to us.

The sun rises for the evil also.

God has given certain benefactions to all men, and from which none are
excluded.

Who is so wretched, so despised, who born to so hard and sorrowful a
destiny that he has never perceived the munificence of the gods? Seek
out even those who bewail their fate and who are always complaining, you
will not find among the entire number one who has not experienced the
beneficence of heaven; there is not one for whom there has not flowed
something from the most inexhaustible of all fountains.

Add, now, that external circumstances do not coerce the gods, but their
sempiternal will is their law. They have established an order of events
which they do not change. The gods never repent of their first purpose.

Beneficence consists not in what is done or given, but in the spirit of
the doer or giver.

It is a most glorious work to save even the unwilling and refractory.

The door to virtue is closed to no one; it is open to all, admits all;
virtue invites everybody, free-born, freedmen, slaves, kings and exiles.
It selects neither class nor condition, it seeks the man only.

Nature directs us to do good to all men whether bond or free, free-born
or emancipated slaves. Wherever there is a human being, there is a place
for beneficence.

He who reasons thus (like Epicurus), does not hear the voices of
supplicants and the prayers offered everywhere, in public and private,
with hands outstretched toward heaven. This could not be, nor is it
possible that all men should have willingly consented to the folly of
addressing deaf divinities and powerless gods, if they had not
recognized their benefactions, sometimes given spontaneously, sometimes
in answer to prayer, always great, timely, averting by their
intervention impending disasters.


                         FROM VARIOUS SOURCES.


It is easy to form the mind while it is still tender; but it is
difficult to root out those vices that have grown up with it.

It is a great thing to know when to speak and when to be silent.

The vices of others we have before our eyes; our own, behind our backs.

Use your ears oftener than your tongue.

Nothing is more out of place in him who is inflicting punishment than
anger.

It is not the issue of a thing that ought to be taken into account, but
the purpose.

Every crime is committed before the deed is done.

To cupidity nothing is enough; to nature even a little is enough.

Vice takes possession of us unconsciously; virtue is difficult to find,
and we need a guide and teacher. Vices are learned without a teacher.

Stars shall impinge upon stars and all matter that now delights us with
its beautiful order shall burn in one huge conflagration.

All that is best can neither be given to men nor taken from them.

There are two things, the most precious of all, that attend us
whithersoever we turn our steps: common nature and personal virtue.
These things are so, believe me, because they were so willed by the
creator of the universe, whether it is that God who controls everything,
or incorporeal reason, the artificer of great works, or the divine
spirit that pervades equally the greatest and the smallest things.

If the dead have any feeling, the soul of my brother, now set free from
a long imprisonment, is at length in the full enjoyment of his freedom
and his majority; he beholds with delight the nature of things and looks
down upon human affairs from his high abode; but things divine, the
causes of which he so long sought out in vain, he now beholds at close
range. Why then do I pine away in sorrow for him who is either blessed
or not all? To mourn for one who is in bliss is envy; for one who is
not, folly.

Borne on high, he soars among beatified spirits, and a sanctified
company welcomes him—the Scipios, the Catos, released by the beneficence
of death. There thy father devotes himself to his grandson, resplendent
in the new light even though in that place all are known to each. He
explains to him the motions of the stars around him; not from
conjectures, but, versed in the knowledge of all things, he gladly
inducts him into the arcana of nature.

If you will believe those who have looked more deeply into the truth,
our whole life is a punishment.

For those who sail this sea so stormy, so exposed to every tempest,
there is no harbor except death.

He now enjoys a serene and cloudless heaven. From this humble and low
abode, he has sped swiftly into that region, wherever it may be, where
souls, freed from their chains, are received into the abode of the
blest. He now roams about at will, and beholds with supremest delight
all that is good in the universe.... He has not left us; he has gone
before.


   DE PROVIDENTIA SIVE QUARE ALIQUA INCOMMODA BONIS VIRIS ACCIDANTCUM
                            PROVIDENTIA SIT.


    NOTE:—This monograph is addressed to the same Lucilius, procurator
    of Sicily, to whom Seneca also dedicates his letters and his
    Problems in Physics. The date of composition is not known, but it
    probably belongs to the later years of the author’s life. The
    opening sentences seem to make it a part of a larger work on ethics,
    or rather of a theodicy, which was either never completed or has not
    come down to us. This is a serious loss both to us and to Seneca: to
    us, because such a work would doubtless have placed before us a
    complete theory of human conduct as conceived by a man who was
    thoroughly conversant with the motives that dominate men; to Seneca,
    because it would in all probability have explained if not justified
    some of the inconsistencies that have so sadly marred his career.
    Indeed the fundamental proposition of the essay is inconsistent,
    since the conclusion does not follow from the premises. For if the
    patient endurance of tribulation is the supreme test of a good man,
    how is he justified in avoiding that test, as our author proposes,
    by taking his own life?


                                   I.


You have asked me, Lucilius, why it is, if the world is governed by a
Providence, that so many misfortunes befall good men. To this an answer
would more properly be given in a work in which I should undertake to
prove that a Providence presides over the affairs of men, and that God
dwells among us. But since you deem it best to take a small portion of
the whole subject, and to settle this single disputed question, the main
proposition meanwhile being left untouched, I shall undertake a case of
little difficulty: I shall plead the cause of the gods.

2. It is superfluous to show at the present time that so great a work
does not stand fast and firm without an overseer; that the regular
course of the heavenly bodies is not a fortuitous concourse of atoms;
that those objects which chance puts in motion are subject to frequent
disturbances and sudden collisions; that this harmonious velocity is
under the sway of an eternal law governing everything on land and sea,
no less than the brilliant luminaries which shine according to a
prearranged plan; that this order is not the result of elements moving
about at random, neither can fortuitous aggregations of matter cohere
with such art that the immense mass of the earth remains motionless
while beholding the rapid gyrations of the heavenly bodies about itself;
that the seas poured into the valleys to fructify the soil never feel
any increase from rivers; or that enormous vegetation grows from the
minutest seeds.

3. Not even those things that appear to be uncertain and without
regularity—I mean rains and clouds and the bolts of lightning darting
from the clouds, and fires poured from the cleft summits of mountains,
and the quakings of the tottering ground, and such other disturbances of
the earth about us—are without a rational explanation, unforeseen though
they be. These things, too, have their causes, not less those which,
when they appear in unexpected places, are regarded as prodigies, such
as warm springs among the billows or new insular lands rising up in the
vast expanse of the sea.

4. Moreover, if one has observed the beach laid bare by the waves of the
retiring sea and covered again within a brief space of time, does he
believe that the waves have been contracted and drawn inward by a kind
of blind restlessness, to burst forth again to seek with a mighty onset
their accustomed seats, especially since the waters increase at regular
intervals and move according to a fixed day and hour just as the lunar
star attracts them more or less, under whose influence the ocean
regulates its ebb and flow? However, these questions had better be
reserved for their proper place, since you do not deny the existence of
a providence, but only bring complaints against it.

5. I wish to reconcile you with the gods since they regard the best men
with the most favor. For in the nature of things, what is good can never
harm the good. Between good men and the gods a friendship exists, virtue
being the bond of amity. Friendship, do I say? nay, more; it is a near
relationship and likeness, since the good man differs from God only in
time; he is His pupil and imitator, His true offspring, whom his august
father, no lenient trainer in the virtues, brings up somewhat rigorously
after the manner of stern parents.

6. Accordingly, when you see good men, the favorites of the gods,
toiling, sweating, ascending by hard paths, and the bad living in
licentious indulgence and growing effeminate in luxury, consider that we
too are gratified with the sobriety of our sons, but with the wantonness
of our household slaves; that the former gain greater self-control by
the sterner discipline, the latter are confirmed in their presumption.
The same thing is true in regard to God; He does not support the good
man in enervating ease; He tries him, hardens him, prepares him for
Himself.


                                  II.


“Why do the good meet with so many adversities?” (you ask). No evil
thing can befall a good man; things in their nature contradictory may
not be commingled. Just as so many rivers, so much water falling from
the clouds above, so great a number of springs impregnated with mineral
substances, do not change the saltness of the sea, do not even dilute
it; so the assaults of adversity produce no change in the spirit of a
brave man. He remains steadfast, and whatever betides he gains for his
colors, for he is stronger than all external circumstances. I do not, it
is true, say, that he is insensible to them, but that he triumphs over
them, and, moreover, remains calm and serene in spite of obstacles. All
untoward events he regards as so much drill. Besides, is there any man
who is only an admirer of noble deeds, that is not eager for honest
toil, or ready to do his duty with alacrity even in the face of danger?
To what industrious man is not inactivity a punishment? We see athletes,
whose purpose is to develop their bodily strength, matching themselves
with the most doughty antagonists, and requiring those who prepare them
for a contest to use all their strength against their pupils; they allow
themselves to be smitten and buffeted, and if they do not find suitable
single antagonists they pit themselves against several at the same time.

3. When virtue has no antagonist it becomes enervated; then only does it
appear what its true character is, how strong, how virile it is when
patient endurance shows what it can accomplish. You surely know that
good men must do the same thing, to the end that they may not fear what
is hard or formidable, nor complain about fate. Whatever happens, let
the good bear it patiently and turn it to good uses. Not what we bear
but how we bear it, is the important thing. Do you not see how
differently fathers and mothers show their love for their children? The
former want their sons to be aroused early in order that they may betake
themselves to their studies; their vacations even they would not have
them pass in idleness, and they draw sweat and sometimes even tears from
the youths; but mothers want to fondle them on their bosom, keep them in
the shade; they would never have them weep, never be sad, never undergo
toil.

4. God has a father’s feelings toward good men and ardently loves them,
and says: “By labors, sorrows, privations, let them be tried in order
that they may gain real strength.” Animals that are being fattened grow
languid by their inactivity, and by the weight of their own bodies
become incapable not only of work, but of movement. Unalloyed felicity
cannot withstand any shock, but a constant struggle against obstacles
hardens a man against injuries, and he does not succumb to any disaster,
for even if he falls, he fights on his knees.

5. Are you surprised if God, who is a most devoted friend of the good,
and who wishes them to attain the highest degree of perfection, assigns
them a place in which they are to be disciplined? Verily, I am not
surprised that sometimes a desire seizes the the gods to behold great
men struggling against some misfortune. To us mortals it at times
affords pleasure to see a courageous youth await with the hunting spear,
the onset of some wild beast, or if with unblanched cheek he thrusts
back the attack of a lion; and the spectacle is agreeable in proportion
to the rank of him who exhibits it.

6. These are not the sights that attract the attention of the gods, but
childish pastimes and the pleasures of men who have no serious aims.
Behold a spectacle worthy of a god who is intensely interested in his
work; behold a pair of champions worthy of god, a brave man pitted
against adverse fortune, especially if he himself be the challenging
party. I do not see, I say, what more agreeable sight on earth Jupiter
can look upon, if he turns his attention thither, than to behold Cato,
after his party had been more than once defeated, standing erect,
nevertheless, amid the ruins of the republic.

7. Said he, “Though everything has yielded to the behests of one man;
though the lands be guarded by legions and the seas by fleets and the
soldiers of Caesar keep watch at our gates, there is a way of escape for
Cato. Single-handed will he make a broad way for liberty; this sword,
pure and untarnished even in civil strife, shall at length perform a
worthy and noble deed; the liberty it could not give to his country, it
shall give to Cato. Perform my soul, a deed long meditated, free thyself
from earthly concerns!

8. Already Petreius and Juba have turned their swords against each other
and lie dead, slain with mutual hands. A brave and glorious covenant to
die was that, but one that was unworthy of my greatness; it is as
ignoble for Cato to beg for death at the hands of another as (to beg
for) life.” I am sure the gods looked with keen satisfaction when that
hero, the intrepid liberator of himself, takes counsel for the safety of
others and provides a way of escape for the fugitives; when he pursues
his studies far even into that final night; when he thrusts the sword
into his own sacred breast; when he disembowels himself and sets free
with his own hand that purest spirit unworthy to be contaminated with a
sword.

9. Hence I would fain believe that the thrust was badly directed and the
wound not fatal; it was not enough for the immortal gods to have beheld
Cato once only; his courage was restrained and called back that it might
show itself in a more difficult part. For death may be said not so much
to have come upon so great a soul as to have been sought by it. Why
should they not rejoice to see their favorite pass from life in a way so
glorious and memorable? Death deifies those whose departure fills with
admiration even those who stand aghast at the manner of it.


                                  III.


But as I proceed with my discourse, I shall show that not all those
things which seem to be evils are such. For the present, I affirm that
the conditions you call hard, adverse, and terrible, are in the first
place best for those very persons whom they befall; and in the second,
for all men, since the gods are more concerned for mankind as a whole
than for the individual; and lastly; that they happen either with their
approval, or to men who are worthy of them, if without their approval.
To these propositions I shall add that such things take place in the
fixed order of the world and rightly happen to the good, in virtue of
the same law which makes them good. From this point of view I shall then
convince you that you never need feel pity for the good man; for though
he may be called unfortunate, he never is so.

2. The most difficult of the affirmations I have made seems to be the
first, to wit, that it is for our own good these very things happen
which we dread and shudder at. Is it good for anybody, you say, to be
driven into exile, to see his children reduced to want, to bear a wife
to the grave, to be disgraced, maimed? If you are surprised that this
should result in good to any one, then you will be surprised that
persons are sometimes cured by cutting and burning not the less than by
hunger and thirst. But if you will reflect that as remedial measures,
the bones have to be laid bare or taken out, veins to be extracted, and
even members to be amputated, because they cannot be allowed to remain
attached to it without detriment to the whole body; you will also admit
that some unpleasant things are an advantage to those whom they befall,
no less than that some things which are accounted good and are sought
after, are an injury to those who find pleasure in them, such as eating
and drinking to excess and other things that kill by the gratification
they afford.

3. Among the many noteworthy sayings of our friend Demetrius there is
one that is fresh in my mind and keeps sounding and ringing in my ears.
“There is no being,” says he, “more unfortunate than the man who never
felt adversity.” For he has never had an opportunity to test himself.
Though everything may have come to him when he wished it or even before
he wished it, the gods have nevertheless not thought well of him. They
have adjudged him unworthy of a struggle with adversity lest he be
overcome by it, for it avoids all cowards as if saying, Why should I
choose such an antagonist? he lays down his arms forthwith; there is no
need of all my strength against him; he is beaten by a feeble onset; he
cannot bear even a look.

4. Let another be selected for the struggle. It is a shame to fight with
a man who wants to be beaten. A gladiator regards it as a disgrace to be
pitted against an inferior antagonist for he knows there is no glory in
overcoming one who is vanquished without danger. Adversity does
likewise; it seeks out foemen worthy of their antagonist and passes by
some with disdain. It always attacks the doughtiest and boldest for a
trial of its strength.

5. It tries Mucius with fire, Fabricius with poverty, Regulus with
torture, Socrates with poison, Cato with death. It is misfortune alone
that finds noble examples. Is Mucius to be commiserated because he put
his hand into an enemy’s fire and punished himself for his mistake?
because he vanquished with a burned hand a king whom he could not
vanquish with it armed? Would he have been happier if he had warmed it
in the bosom of a mistress?

6. Is Fabricius to be pitied because he tilled his own field when not
engaged in public duties? because he waged war against riches as well as
against Pyrrhus? because he ate, by his own fireside, the same roots and
herbs that his triumphant old age pulled up on his farm? Can we say that
he would have been happier if he had filled his stomach with fish from a
far off strand and with exotic birds? or if he had stimulated his jaded
and nauseated stomach with oysters from the Upper and the Lower sea? or
if he had encircled with a huge pile of different fruits, the finest
game captured at the cost of many a huntsman’s life?

7. Is Rutilius unfortunate because those who condemned him decided a
case against themselves for all time to come? because he was more
willing to be deprived of his country than to be recalled from exile?
because he alone dared to deny anything to the dictator Sulla, and when
invited to return, not only refused, but fled farther? “Let those manage
affairs,” said he, “whom thy good fortune keeps in Rome! Let them look
upon the pool of blood in the Forum and the heads of senators floating
on the Servilian lake,—for that was the field of carnage of those
proscribed by Sulla—and the bands of assassins roaming through the city,
and the many thousands of Roman citizens slain in one place after
pledges of immunity had been given, yes, because of those very pledges!
Let those look upon these things who are not able to endure exile.”

8. Shall we say that Sulla is to be congratulated because, when he
descends to the Forum, a way is opened for him with the sword? because
he allows the heads of men of consular rank to be shown him in public,
and paid the price of their slaughter by the hand of the quaestor and
from the fisc? And he who did these things is the same man that enacted
the Cornelian law! Let us return to Regulus. What injury did his destiny
do him by making him, the well-known exemplar of good faith, an exemplar
of patient endurance? Nails pierce his skin, and whatever way he lays
down his weary body he lies on a wound, while his open eyes doom him to
perpetual wakefulness.

9. The greater the anguish, the greater will be the glory. Wouldst thou
know how little he regretted the high value he set on fortitude? Heal
his wounds and send him back to the senate—he will give the same advice
(as before). Dost thou think Maecenas happier when a prey to the
torments of love and when grieving over the daily repulses of a wayward
wife, he courts sleep amid the sound of symphonies softly sounding in
the distance? Though he stupify himself with wine, and seek diversion in
the murmur of waters, or trick his troubled mind with a thousand
pastimes, he lies awake on his bed of down no less than the other on his
bed of torture. But for the former there is the solace that he is
enduring hardness for a noble purpose, and he can look away from his
pain to its cause; the latter, surfeited with pleasures, weighed down by
an excess of good fortune, is more tormented by the cause of his
sufferings than by the sufferings themselves.

10. Not yet has vice so completely taken possession of the human race as
to make it doubtful that the majority, if they had the choice of their
lot, would prefer that of Regulus to that of Maecenas. Or, if there
should be anybody who had presumption enough to say that he had rather
be born a Maecenas than a Regulus, the same person, even though he might
not openly admit it, would also rather be born a Terentia. Do you
pronounce Socrates unfortunate because he drained the executioner’s cup
as if it had been the draught of immortality, and discoursed about death
up to the moment it overtook him? Was his lot an unhappy one because his
blood congealed and his vital force stopped by the gradually advancing
rigor of death?

11. How much more is he to be envied than those who are served from
goblets studded with gems, for whom a male prostitute, accustomed to
submit to every kind of abuse, whose virility is gone or at least
doubtful, dissolves the snow that floats in a golden chalice? Whatever
they drink they vomit up, to their chagrin, and taste again mixed with
bile; but he willingly and with joy drains the poisonous draught. For
Cato it is sufficient that the unanimous verdict of mankind has raised
him to the pinnacle of felicity; him destiny selected as one who was
fitted to contend against everything that is to be dreaded.

12. Is the enmity of the powers that be a serious matter? let him be
opposed at the same time by Pompey, Caesar, Crassus. Is it hard to bear
when one is less honored than worse men? let him be sacrificed for
Vatinius. Is it a hard thing to be involved in civil wars? throughout
the whole world let him fight for the good cause, equally renowned for
his misfortunes as for his bravery. Is it hard to take one’s own life?
let him do it. What do I wish to prove by these things? I would have all
men know that those vicissitudes of which Cato was deemed worthy, cannot
be regarded as evils.


                                  IV.


Prosperity comes to ordinary people and to men of mean abilities, but it
is the prerogative of a great man to overcome the calamities and terrors
that frighten mortals. In truth, to be always happy and to pass one’s
life without mental anxiety, is to be ignorant of half of man’s destiny.
Thou art a great man; yet how am I to know it unless fate gives thee an
opportunity to show thy worth?

2. Thou didst enter the Olympian games as a contestant; if there was
none beside thyself, thou hast the crown, thou hast not the victory. I
congratulate thee, not as a brave man, but as one who has gained the
consulship or the praetorship: thou hast won political honors. I can say
the same thing to a good man, unless some more than ordinary emergency
has given him an opportunity to show his strength of soul.

3. Unhappy do I adjudge thee, if thou hast never been unhappy; thou hast
passed thy life without an adversary. No one knows what thou mightest
have done; thou dost not even know it thyself. We need to be tried that
we may find out what we are; what a man can do can be ascertained only
by trial. For this reason men have sometimes voluntarily encountered
obstacles that seemed to evade them and sought an opportunity for
demonstrating to others the virtue that was passing into oblivion.

4. I assert that great men sometimes rejoice in tribulation like valiant
soldiers in battles. I heard Triumphus, a gladiator under Caius Caesar
(Caligula) complain because he had so little to do. “How my best days
are speeding away,” said he! Courage is eager for danger and looks to
the end in view, not at what it is likely to encounter, for the reason
that what it encounters is part of the glory. Warriors are proud of
their wounds; joyfully they point to the blood it was their good fortune
to shed. Those who return from the combat unscathed may have been just
as brave—it is the wounded man that is the observed of all eyes.

God shows his good will to those whom he would have attain the highest
excellence every time he gives them an opportunity to display courage
and endurance; this is possible only in some contingency beset with
difficulties. You form your opinion of a pilot in a storm; of a soldier,
in battle. By what test am I to know how thou wilt bear up against
poverty, if thou aboundest in wealth? By what test am I to know how thou
wilt bear up under ignominy and disgrace and popular hatred, if thou
growest old amid public applause? if a strong and unswerving popular
partiality supports thee in all thou doest?

6. How am I to know with what equanimity thou wilt bear the loss of
children, if thou seest about thee all those thou hast begotten? I have
listened to thee when thou wert offering consolation to others; then
should I have seen thee when thou wert thyself in need of consolation;
when thou wert trying to restrain thyself from sorrowing. Do not, I
beseech thee, shrink from these things which the immortal gods send upon
thee as stimuli to thy courage. A disaster is an occasion of virtue.
Those persons one can rightly call wretched who grow effeminate in
superabounding prosperity; whom a dead calm bears along, as it were, in
a motionless sea.

7. No matter what befalls them, they are unprepared for it. Hardships
bear heaviest on those who have never known them; heavy lies the yoke on
the neck that has not felt it. The mere thought of a wound makes the raw
recruit turn pale; the veteran looks without blanching upon his own
blood because he knows that he has often gained a victory at the price
of it. Then it is that God trains and hardens those whom he has chosen,
whom he loves and wishes well to; but those whom he seems to treat with
indulgence, whom he spares, he keeps tender for the evils to come. For
you are mistaken if you conclude that any one is exempt; he who has long
basked in the sunshine of fortune will have his turn.

Every one that thinks he is discharged has been placed among the
reserves. (You ask) why does God afflict every good man with ill health
or sorrow or other misfortune? Because in camp-life the most perilous
duties are also laid on the bravest; the commander sends picked men to
fall upon the enemy from a nocturnal ambuscade, or to explore a route,
or to carry by assault an outpost. No one of those who go forth says,
“The general has a poor opinion of me,” but, “He has judged wisely and
well,” And so let all say who are ordered to undergo what to the coward
and the slothful seem to be painful experiences: God has accounted us
worthy to be used as examples by which to show how much human nature can
endure. Flee from pleasure, from that unmanly felicity in which the
active powers of the mind grow torpid, unless something intervenes to
recall man’s lot, by a sort of perpetual intoxication.

9. Him whom glass windows protect against every breath of air; whose
feet are kept warm by fomentations periodically renewed; whose
dining-rooms are made always comfortable by heat within the walls and
under the floor—such a person, not even a gentle breeze passes over
without danger. Though everything that transcends the bounds of
moderation is hurtful, the most perilous intemperance is that of good
fortune. It excites the brain, awakens idle fancies in the mind, puts
dense darkness between the false and the true.

10. Which is better, to bear up under continuous misfortune that incites
us to do our best, or to be crushed under unbounded and inexhaustible
riches? Death comes gently when the stomach is empty; it is from
repletion that men die like beasts. Accordingly the gods follow the same
method with good men that teachers follow with good pupils—they require
the hardest labor from those of whom they cherish the highest hopes.
Dost thou believe that it is out of hatred for their children that the
Lacedaemonians try, by public scourgings, what stuff they are made of?
Their own fathers exhort them to bear bravely their flagellations, and
ask them, when bleeding and half dead, to proffer unflinchingly their
wounds for fresh wounds.

11. Why is it strange if God sends severe trials upon noble spirits? a
test of one’s courage is never an easy matter. Is it destiny that
scourges and lacerates us? let us endure it; ’tis not wanton cruelty, it
is a contest; the oftener we enter it, the stronger we shall become. The
solidest part of the body, frequent use has made so. We must be
subjected to the buffetings of fortune in order that in this way we may
become callous to it. Little by little, fortune makes us a match for
itself; contempt of dangers results from often braving them. In this way
sailors inure their bodies to the sea; the hands of the husbandman are
calloused; the arms of the soldier are strong from hurling javelins; the
limbs of runners are agile. That part of everybody is the strongest that
has exercised the most.

12. The soul acquires the strength to brave misfortune by patient
endurance; what it can effect in us thou mayst know, if thou dost but
consider what hardship does for those peoples that go about without
clothing and are strong by their very indigence. Consider all the
nations over whom the sway of Rome does not extend, I mean the Germans
and every nomad tribe along the Danube. Perpetual winter, a severe
climate, bear hard upon them, a sterile soil grudgingly supports them, a
hut or branches of trees protect them against the rain, they roam over
marshes hardened by frost, for food they capture wild beasts.

13. Dost thou think them wretched? No one is wretched when he performs
what habit has made second nature to him; for by degrees we find
pleasure in doing what we began to do from necessity. These peoples have
no houses and no resting place except as weariness finds them from day
to day; their food is cheap and obtained only as wanted; their naked
bodies are exposed to the terrible extremes of a horrid climate; what
thou regardest as a frightful calamity is the whole life of many
peoples.

14. Why dost thou wonder that good men are called upon to undergo
violent shocks to the end that they may stand the more firmly? A tree
does not take deep root, or grow strong, unless it is frequently shaken
by the wind; for as a result of violent agitation its fiber is toughened
and its roots more firmly set. Those are fragile that grow up in
sheltered valleys. It is therefore a boon to good men, as it makes them
fearless amid danger, to become familiar with hardships and to bear with
equanimity those things that are not ills, except when they are borne
with an ill grace.


                                   V.


Add, now, that it is best for all that every good man should, so to
speak, be always under arms and in action. It is the purpose of God,
just as if He were a wise man, to demonstrate that those things which
the average man longs for, which he fears, are neither good nor evil;
but it will be evident that those things are good that are sent upon
good men, and those evil, that fall upon the bad. Blindness would be
dreadful, if nobody had lost his sight except those who deserved to have
their eyes put out. Accordingly, let Appius and Metellus be deprived of
eyesight. Riches are not a good.

2. And so even the procurer Elius is rich in order that money to which
men have given a sacred character in temples may also be found in a
brothel. In no way is God better able to expose to contempt those things
that men covet than by bestowing them upon the vilest and taking them
from the worthiest. “But,” sayst thou, “it is unjust that a good man
should suffer mutilation, or be crucified, or be bound in fetters, while
the bad strut proudly at large and live in luxury.”

3. What then? is it not also unjust when brave men are required to take
up arms, to pass the night in camps and to defend the outposts, though
the bandages are still on their wounds, while in the city, eunuchs and
debauchees by profession go about in security. What further? is it not
unjust that the noblest virgins should be aroused at night to perform
their sacred duties while impure women are enjoying sound sleep? Toil
claims the best men. The senate is often in session during the entire
day, when at the same time all the vilest men are either taking their
ease in the Campus Martius, or loitering in eating-houses, or wasting
their time in idle gossip. It is just so in the world at large—good men
toil, sacrifice themselves or are sacrificed, and willingly at that.
They are not dragged along by destiny, they follow it and keep pace with
it; had they known whither it would lead them, they would have preceded
it.

4. I remember also to have heard these encouraging words from that
noblest of men, Demetrius. “This one complaint,” said he, “I have to
make against you, ye immortal gods: it is that ye did not sooner make
known to me your will; for of my own accord I would have come to those
things to which I am now summoned. Do you wish to take away my children?
For you I have brought them up. Do you wish any portion of my body? Take
it. No great thing it is that I am offering you; soon I shall resign it
entirely to you. Do you wish my life? Why not? I shall not be slow to
give back to you what ye have entrusted to my keeping; ye shall find me
willing to give up anything ye ask. Still I should rather have proferred
it to you than given it up. What need was there to take what you could
have had as a gift. Yet not even now do ye need to constrain me, since
that is not taken from a man which he does not try to retain. I am in no
sense the victim of constraint or violence, nor am I God’s slave, but I
am in accord with Him, and this all the more cheerfully because I know
that everything takes its course in accordance with an immutable law
established from all eternity.”

5. The fates lead us, and our lot is assigned to us from the very hour
of our birth. Cause depends upon cause; an unbroken chain of events
links together public and private affairs. We ought therefore to bear
with fortitude whatever befalls us because everything takes place, not
as we think, by chance, but in its due order. A long time in advance,
all our pleasures and our pains have been determined, and although in
the great diversity of individual lives, one life may seem to stand
apart, it all comes to this: transitory beings ourselves we have entered
into a transitory inheritance.

6. Why then does this disquiet us? Why indulge in complaints? it is the
law of our existence. Let nature use our bodies, which are its own, as
it wishes; let us cheerfully and bravely meet whatever comes, bearing in
mind that what we lose is not our property. What is the duty of a good
man? To resign himself to his destiny. It is a great consolation to
share the fate of the universe. Whatever it be that decrees how we are
to live, how to die, it binds even the gods by the same inexorable law;
an irresistible current bears along terrestrial and celestial things.

The creator and governor of the universe has indeed prescribed the
course of events, but He Himself follows them; He obeys always, He
commanded but once.

7. “But why was God so unjust in the destinies he prescribed for
mortals, as to send upon good men poverty, wounds, and cruel deaths”?
The artisan cannot change matter; it is passive. There are some things
that cannot be separated from others; they are bound together and
indivisible. Sluggish natures and such as are prone to sink into slumber
or into a state closely akin to slumber, are conjoined of inert
elements; to form a man who is really worthy of the name a more heroic
destiny is needed. His path will not be smooth; he must go up-hill and
down-hill, be tossed on the waves, and guide his bark through turbid
waters; in spite of changing fortune, he must hold on his way.

8. He will meet many obstacles hard to remove or surmount, but he will
himself remove them and smooth his path. Gold is tried by fire; brave
men by misfortune. Behold to what heights virtue may climb; thou
shouldst know that it cannot go by ways that are free from dangers.

         Hard is the way at first: though drawn by prancing steeds,
         Slow, up the sky, the shining car proceeds;—
         On land and sea I gaze from heaven’s high crest;
         Fear and emotion fill my heaving breast.
         Steep is the downward way, and with tight rein
         I must the ardor of my steeds restrain;
         E’en Tethys, wont to greet me ’neath the waves,
         Fears lest we plunge headlong to wat’ry graves.

9. When the high-spirited youth heard these words he said, “I like the
way; I shall ascend it even though I fall forthwith in so doing.” The
sun-god still tries to dissuade him from his rash purpose by exciting
his fears:

             Hold straight thy course nor turn for aught aside,
             Through Taurus’ horns adverse thy coursers guide,
             And Haemon’s bow and Leo’s searching face.

To this he replied, “Yoke the steeds to the chariot; by the very words
which you seek to deter me, you incite me. I long to stand where Sol
himself quakes with fear; it is only ignoble and weak souls that journey
on safe roads; courage ventures on giddy heights.”


                                  VI.


“But why does God suffer any evil to befall the good”? Verily, He does
not suffer it. He wards off from them all evils, crimes and misdeeds and
impure thoughts and avaricious designs and unbridled passions and lust
after other men’s property; He watches over and protects them. Will any
one in addition to this demand of God that He shall also bear the
luggage of good men (as if He were a slave)! They themselves cast this
burden upon God; mere externals they make light of. Democritus threw
away his riches, thinking them a fardel upon his noble soul. Why do you
wonder that God sometimes suffers that to come upon a good man which he
himself desires?

2. “Good men sometimes lose their children.” Why not, when they
sometimes even put them to death? “They are sent into exile.” Why not,
when they sometimes leave their country, voluntarily, never to return?
“They are put to death.” Why not, when they sometimes lay violent hands
on themselves? “Why do they suffer many hardships?” That they may teach
others to suffer patiently; they are born to be examples.

3. Think of God as speaking to them thus: “What right have ye to
complain of me, ye who take pleasure in doing right? Other men I have
encompassed with seductive pleasures and their torpid souls I have
lulled into a long and delusive sleep; gold, silver and ivory I have
lavished upon them; yet at heart they are good for nothing. Those men
whom you look upon as fortunate, if you regard them, not with respect to
what is external but what is concealed, are wretched, unclean, deformed,
adorned on the outside after the similitude of their own walls. Their
good fortune is not substantial and unalloyed; it is a mere crust and a
thin one at that.

4. Accordingly, as long as they are allowed to stand and to show
themselves as they wish to appear, they make a brilliant and imposing
display; but when something occurs that disarranges their plans and
discloses their true character, then it becomes apparent how real and
deep their foulness. To you I have given a genuine, an abiding good; the
more one turns it about and looks at it from every side, the greater and
better it appears. I have given you the strength to contemn what other
men fear; to make of little account what others long for. You do not
shine because of externals; it is the kingdom within you that is your
highest good. Thus does the world disdain what is on the outside because
happy in the contemplation of itself; within you have I placed all real
good; not to need happiness is your happiness.”

5. “But many sad occurrences take place, things from which we shrink in
terror, and which are hard to bear.” “Because I am not able to ward them
off from you, I have armed you against all changes of fortune. Endure
bravely; in this you may surpass God: He is exempt from suffering, you
are superior to it. Contemn poverty; no one lives so poor as he is born.
Contemn pain; either it will end or you. Contemn fortune; I have given
to it no weapon with which to wound the soul. Contemn death; it either
ends your existence or transfers it.

6. Before all things, I took care that no one should keep you here
against your will; the way for your departure is open. If you do not
want to fight, you can run away. Therefore, with all the restrictions I
have placed upon you, I have made nothing easier for you than death.
Only look and you will see how short and easy is the way to liberty. I
have made the way shorter for those who wish to go out of the world than
for those who are entering it; besides, destiny would have had great
power over you, if it were as hard for a man to die as to be born.

7. Every moment of time, every place, can teach you how easy it is to
quit nature’s service and to return to her her gift. At the very foot of
the altar and amid the solemnities of those who are offering sacrifices
for the preservation of life, learn to know death. The huge bodies of
bulls drop from the effects of a little wound, and beasts of enormous
strength are felled by a blow from a human hand; with a little piece of
iron the jointures of the vertabrae are severed, and when the ligature
that binds the head and neck is cut asunder, the huge mass falls dead to
the ground.

8. The breath does not lurk in some secret hiding place, nor must it
necessarily be sought out with the sword; there is no need of piercing
the vitals with a deep wound; death is close at hand. I have not
designated any particular place for the fatal thrust, it may enter
anywhere. What is called death, that time in which the spirit leaves the
body, is so brief that its fleetness cannot be perceived. Whether it be
a noose that strangles you, or water that suffocates you, or a fall upon
the hard earth that dashes the life out of you, or fire drawn in with
the breath that cuts off its return—whatever it be, its effect is
speedy. Are you not ashamed to fear so long what may be done so
quickly?”
